## What is Engineering?

 > Engineering is the application of scientific and mathematical principals to solve problems.

 According to ABET, the Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology, engineering can be defined as:

 >  The application of scientific and mathematical knowledge to develop ways to use natural resources for the benefit of people.

 ABET further defines Engineering Design as:

  > Engineering design is a process of devising a system, component, or process to meet desired needs and specifications within constraints. It is an iterative, creative, decision-making process in which the basic sciences, mathematics, and engineering sciences are applied to convert resources into solutions. Engineering design involves identifying opportunities, developing requirements, performing analysis and synthesis, generating multiple solutions, evaluating solutions against requirements, considering risks, and making trade- offs, for the purpose of obtaining a high-quality solution under the given circumstances. For illustrative purposes only, examples of possible constraints include accessibility, aesthetics, codes, constructability, cost, ergonomics, extensibility, functionality, interoperability, legal considerations, maintainability, manufacturability, marketability, policy, regulations, schedule, standards, sustainability, or usability.

Engineering Science is defined by ABET as:

 > Engineering sciences are based on mathematics and basic sciences but carry knowledge further toward creative application needed to solve engineering problems. These studies provide a bridge between mathematics and basic sciences on the one hand and engineering practice on the other.

Reverse Engineering is the process of taking an device, object or system apart to determine how it works then copy and/or improve it.
