## Engineering Disciplines

Engineering is fairly broad and can be divided into disciplines or branches. These disciplines or branches are more specific than engineering in general. The three most common engineering disciplines are Civil Engineering, Electrical Engineering, and Mechanical Engineering.

### Civil Engineering

As the design of civilian structures, such as bridges and buildings, matured as a technical discipline, the term civil engineering entered the lexicon as a way to distinguish between those specializing in the construction of such non-military projects and those involved in the discipline of military engineering.

### Electrical Engineering

Electrical engineers are involved in the research, design, development, testing, manufacture and installation of electrical equipment, components and systems. Electrical engineers also apply electrical, electronic and magnetic theories to solve problems in the design, manufacture and use of electrical machines.

### Mechanical Engineering

One of the most diverse and versatile engineering fields, mechanical engineering is the study of objects and systems in motion. Mechanical engineers design, build, and maintain mechanical systems.

### Other Engineering Disciplines

Besides Civil, Electrical, and Mechanical - there are other engineering disciplines. Below is a partial list a few other engineering disciplines in alphabetical order.

#### Aeropace Engineering

#### Agriculture Engineering

#### Architectural engineering

#### Automotive Engineering

#### Bioengineering

#### Chemical Engineering

Chemical engineers will be responsible for monitoring and troubleshooting existing chemical processes and proposing modifications to improve chemical process performance.

#### Construction Engineering

#### Computer Engineering

#### Engineering Management

#### Environmental Engineering

#### Geological Engineering

#### Geotechnical Engineering

#### Industrial Engineering

The design or improvement of a system of people, machines, information, and money to achieve some goal with efficiency, quality, and safety.

Being an Industrial Engineer (IE) is very satisfying because you can create an efficient and safe workplace where people are proud of the high quality products and services they produce. IEs improve efficiency, which means that we help bring prosperity. IEs improve quality, which means that we help provide good products and services. And IEs improve safety, which means that we help protect people. You should be very proud that you plan to become an IE. According to the bumper sticker version of industrial engineering, IEs make things better.

#### Manufacturing Engineering

#### Materials Science and Engineering

Materials Science and Engineering (MSE) as a field has grown out of our desire to make things that better our lives; there has always been an interest in the stuff we use to make these things. From manipulating materials existing in nature like wood, bone, stone, and clay, to creating new materials through the smelting of metals or firing of clays to create ceramics, civilization evolved alongside our ability to manipulate materials. For millennia, people have learned through trial and error how to manipulate existing materials to create new materials with new properties. They have handed this knowledge down through generations. In some cases new materials were discovered by alchemists seeking to create gold. As the science of chemistry evolved, we began to create completely synthetic materials such as polymers, and eventually we developed the tools to examine the microstructure. This led to the ability to correlate how processing the material affected its structure and how that in turn affected the properties of that material. Understanding how this relationship influenced the performance of a material led to the birth of the discipline of MSE in the middle of the twentieth century. By combining earlier fields like ceramics and metallurgy with MSE, our understanding of materials continues to evolve rapidly with novel innovation occurring at the interface of the study of different materials.

#### Nuclear Engineering

#### Petroleum Engineering

#### Software Engineering
